[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Hey, I'm Ashleigh Sergeant.
And welcome to "Everyday
Enlightenment."
This is your go-to show
that offers practical tips
from expert guests at
the end of every episode
to help you be more
conscious in the midst
of your busy modern life.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The spiritual ideas and
methods of different Eastern
and Western traditions
are being assimilated now
into popular culture.
Systems of yoga,
meditation, and shamanism
have been around for
thousands of years.
And yet, they still hold
profoundly relevant and helpful
tools for the issues
we struggle with today.
And all three use
archetypal energies along
with the power of myth as tools
for healing and transformation.
Today my guest is one of
my teachers, Sally Kempton.
Sally studied for 30 years
in an Eastern tradition
and spent 20 years as an
initiated monk in the Saraswati
Order.
Sally's book "Awakening Shakti
the Transformative Power
of the Goddesses of Yoga"
teaches modern seekers
the tantric path of
the sacred feminine.
Sally, thanks so much for
being here with me today.
>> I'm so delighted.
>> Well as you know, your
book "Awakening Shakti"
has been one of my nearest and
dearest books for at least five
years now.
And you are definitely
one of the leaders,
I think, in this
conversation around how
these traditions of the Indian
spiritual culture, particularly
around the divine feminine
can help the modern woman
and modern man.
>> Yeah.
Yeah, and the discovery of
archetypal goddess energies
or of the sacred feminine as
a guiding force in nature,
in culture, and in
the human organism
has been completely radical
and life changing for me.
And I have learned
to understand it
in terms of a group
of feminine energies
that come out of the Hindu
tradition whom we call Shakti.
Shakti is a word that means
energy or feminine power.
But they are the
same energies that
have been described
with different faces
and different forms
in other cultures.
>> Yeah, and who was it?
Was it Joseph Campbell who
coined the term archetype?
>> Yeah, Joseph Campbell,
who is, of course,
one of the great mythologists of
all time is certainly of modern
times.
And Carl Jung came up
with the understanding
of the archetype
as a collective-- a
quality that's transpersonal.
You know, it transcends
the human individual.
But it's expressed
through human individuals.
And one thing that Jung
says and that I've actually
heard Jean Houston, who's
also a mythologist talk about
is that everyone who's ever done
something really great in life
has had some kind of
conscious connection
to an archetypal energy--
that to a sense of guidance.
And many people, of
course, think it's God.
They-- you know, they call
that guiding consciousness God.
But if you really look into--
so say, for example, Abraham
Lincoln's relationship with
personal deity-- you
realize that there--
he was acting-- he was relating
to an archetype that stood
for justice, truth, compassion--
you know, that was
a sacred archetype
that he held very close.
And I believe that, as
human beings, this--
the ability to connect
to archetypal energies
is very important
for our development
and for our sense of connection
to the world and each other.
>> How do you define the word
archetype-- the concept of it?
>> Well, an archetype is--
it's a principle that
encompasses certain qualities
in the cosmos.
So for instance, one of
the classic archetypes
is that I would call it the
Aphrodite archetype that which
everyone in Western
culture understands
to be the archetype of
beauty, eroticism, sexuality.
And we see certain
human beings who
carry the Aphrodite archetype.
And we immediately recognize
that transpersonal quality.
You know, for instance,
a great example
is Princess Diana,
who so incarnated
the qualities of feminine beauty
not just as an individual.
But she was tuned in--
tapped into something
that millions of
people felt. I would
say you know not to deny
Diana's individual qualities.
But what we felt when we
loved her was goddess,
a particular form of
the divine feminine
that acted through her form
when she was at her best.
You know, obviously she
was also a human being
with all her stuff.
>> Sure.
>> So that to understand that
there are archetypal energies
that we as humans can tune
into and get strength from
and experience guidance through
is a very, very empowering.
>> Yeah, and another one just
to relate because it's slightly
more connected to
the masculine is--
someone brought this up
to me the other day--
is the archetype of Peter Pan.
>> Totally.
>> Which I love as an archetype,
because it's this quality
and this energy of young
childhood, kind of freewill,
lightness, happiness,
adventure, curiosity,
a little bit of mischievousness
and exists within each of us.
>> Yeah, right on.
And you know, the
king and the queen
and the archetype of the
husband and the wife--
I mean marriage, for
instance, you know,
is an archetypal relationship.
And when I was
married I discovered
that I could walk right into
that marriage archetype.
I knew how to act.
I knew how to be.
People knew how to relate to me,
because both I and my husband
had fit right into
that archetype, which
has been part of human
life, you know, forever--
for such a long time.
>> Sure.
And so this connects
right in to mythology.
>> Yeah.
>> And what role in your
experience does mythology play
obviously in the tradition that
you're initiated into and that
you've been studying
for a long time?
But we see mythology
also show up
in the Native
American traditions,
the aboriginal traditions
of Australia, South America.
It seems this thread
of myth and story
as a way to tap into this
collective consciousness
and these energies
of archetypes is
prevalent in many,
many different cultures
and now becoming more common
or more understood and explored
in the modern world.
>> Yeah, and it also goes to
the recognition that every one
of us has a story
that guides us.
And we may not be
conscious of it.
But you know, for instance,
the American story, right,
is that these adventurous
souls came to this country--
to this empty country,
because it tends to leave out
the Native Americans--
and create--
and explored this
continent and stood
for freedom and democracy.
And this is the American story.
This is a tremendously
inspiring story.
Now it's not true.
[LAUGHTER]
It has some truth to it.
But it's not-- that story
does not really describe
the American experience.
But it's inspired
us for generations.
And when we lose that
story in a certain sense
we lose our raison d'etre.
We lose our sense
of groundedness.
And I would say myth does that.
The narrative with which we see
our personhood and our lives
will govern how we
experience our life.
And that's the thing the great
religious cultures understood
is that you need a story.
You know, and so
you need a story
of that famously as
Jung and Campbell both
said that there is this ancient
story about the goddess who
gives birth to a son.
And then the son goes up and
becomes the goddess' consort
and then is killed in
order for a new son
to be born, a new
consort to come.
And of course,
mythologists explain
this is connected to
the agricultural cycles.
It's all about the seed
going into the Earth
and you know, apparently
disappearing and then the plant
growing.
But that archetype of the
goddess and the young god who
is killed then becomes
the Jesus story
>> Aha.
>> So in other words, there's
so many parallels between
the story of Christ on the cross
and the stories say of Isis
and her murdered husband
whom she brings back to life.
So these stories become
the heart of religion.
And we take them into ourselves.
And they express something
that's very deep in our psyche
that we can't express
in a linear way.
We need a story.
We need an image.
We need something that
connects to our emotional body.
And myth does that.
>> So yeah, the power of
myth and archetype and this
collective consciousness
runs really deep.
And how do you think this
is applicable and relevant
to the modern person and
in our modern culture?
>> Well, first of all I would
say we all agree that we need
a narrative to make
sense of our lives.
But in terms of archetypes,
mythic figures, deity figures--
I would say they
function in several ways
that we kind of
can't do without.
And one of them is that the
myth tells us how to live.
You know, for instance
there's a myth
that I teach about a lot, which
is the story of how the goddess
Durga defeats a whole army--
several armies of demons.
And the story is that bad guys
have taken over the world.
And the good guys are powerless.
They can't defeat them.
So they go to the goddess.
They ask her for help.
And the goddess comes, takes
the form of a beautiful woman,
and single handedly
defeats these armies.
But the thing that I always get
from that story and that has--
that I think generations
of people have gotten--
is that first of all,
there is divine protection.
There is something watching
over the world and that
no matter how bad things
get evil will eventually
be defeated.
And so the goddess Durga
stands for that power in nature
that will right imbalance
and that we can actually
count on no matter how
it feels at the moment.
The other thing that
that myth gives us
is this understanding
about feminine strength.
You know, for women to connect
to an archetypal warrior figure
is tremendously empowering.
So every myth-- I would say
that every really core myth has
an empowerment in it, you know,
whether it's for instance,
the Hanuman stories about
Hanuman leaping over the ocean
and bringing back--
being so strong he can pick up
a mountain and bring it back.
It just-- it's a story
about how we can do anything
we want to do if we have
enough commitment, you know,
how we have the power
to overcome obstacles.
And that Hanuman
story has given heart
to generations and generations
of people who love that myth.
So we-- I think we need them.
I think we need ways of
making our personal experience
transpersonal.
>> Yeah, I think being a
Westerner and having started
to dive into those tales I first
had a pretty big resistance
to it, because I was
raised very Catholic.
And I really never
resonated with this idea
of there being something
external from me that I needed
to be worried about watching
me and taking hash marks
as to whether I was
doing good or bad,
or whether it's
Santa Claus or God.
[LAUGHTER]
>> Yeah.
>> It just never
felt quite right.
And it wasn't until
I really started
to study with you that I
really started to understand,
oh, OK, these myths are not
about something external
from our ourselves.
And it's not some other far
off God from another land
that I'm trying to worship.
>> Yeah, and I think
that mythology,
especially when you have a
non-dual understanding about
it, when you realize that these
are not just stories about
something that might have
happened some time in mythic
time but that they actually
describe the way the universe
works.
And so if you look
at war and peace,
if you look at
hunger and thirst,
you realize that
all of these are--
they are actually
archetypal energies
that we experience in
our lives in certain ways
but that are always--
they're always happening
on the collective level.
>> Sure.
>> So when we understand that,
then we can start to realize
that, OK, there is
no God out there--
you know, that there
is a sacredness that's
embedded in life.
There is-- you know, that's
at the heart of life.
That's inside,
outside, everywhere.
>> Everywhere.
>> Yeah, and that we can--
and I think the thing
about personalizing
these energies is that
they actually give us a way
to relate to energies
that would otherwise
feel abstract and much too
big for us to connect to.
>> Well, let's go there
a little bit deeper too,
because as we start
to talk about, OK,
how do we actually take
these things into life?
What do we-- with
all this information,
whether we know just a little
bit about the goddesses
or we're really
deep within it, how
do we start to take these
things into practical life?
And how do we connect
to these energies?
And where can we see them?
And are they just for
women since we're talking
about goddesses specifically?
And how can we connect
to these energies
as tools for personal
transformation?
>> Yeah, and of course, there
are several different ways that
we can do that.
There is a paradigm
that I like very much,
which is the understanding
that subtle energy exists
on several different levels.
So there are the
subtle energies that we
feel in the atmosphere around
us in nature in the awe
that you might experience
when you're in the Rockies
and looking out over
a mountain landscape.
There are also the energies
that you experience in yourself
as you meditate, as
you do yoga, as you
start to realize
that in you which
is eternal, which is you know,
peaceful, which is powerful.
And then there are what we
call deity energies-- that
is, there are archetypes
that are not human
and that are not
the physical world
but are actually
energies in the universe.
Some people call
them God, guides.
Some people call them spirits.
Some people call them deities.
But if we tune in sufficiently
to the subtle energy around us,
we start to realize
that we actually
can feel that there
are times when
there are helpful energies that
make a difference in our lives.
Some people call them angels--
that those energies are real.
We don't have to
give names to them.
But if we open to
them, we realize
that we are constantly getting
help from the world around us
and that if we know
how to call on them,
they are available to us and
also that we carry them inside.
And I think that's
the thing that you
are getting at-- that
each human being carries
certain archetypal
energies that are expressed
through the personality and
that when we can connect them
to something, let's say,
greater than our than ourselves,
greater than our
personal lives, then
we start to realize, for
example, that when you get
angry at injustice, that this is
not just personal-- that you're
tapping into a field of force
in the universe that wants
to right injustices, that
as Martin Luther King says,
that bends towards justice.
And when we experience
beauty that it's
because we carry
beauty inside us
and that if we really get to
know ourselves and understand
our personalities
and our tendencies,
we start to realize that we
as humans with personality
qualities are connected to
these transpersonal energies.
So and if we can skillfully
recognize that, then we
can draw on those
energies in our actions
and in our relationships.
And they enhance
everything about our lives.
So you don't have to think
of there's someone out there.
There's you know-- there's
Jehovah or Durga whom I'm--
you know, or Jesus
or Mary who I'm
going to pray to and
they'll help me but more
that if I'm willing to open
myself to the presence of grace
and of helpful energy
coming from within
and also coming from other
people, coming from around,
we start to see how
deity energies work.
They are the forces of love in
action in the universe really.
But they come in
different forms.
Some of them are fierce.
Some of them are
compassionate and embracing.
But they're always trying to
uplift us to make things better
to empower the good.
>> So Sally, would you give us
some tips on how to work with
these goddess
archetypal energies?
>> Yes, I'd love to.
And what I'm going to offer you
is an actual visual meditation
practice that you can do
to invoke and call forth
a sense of the divine feminine.
And you can do this
practice with any deity.
And it doesn't even
have to be a deity.
You can do it with your
grandmother if it--
so the idea is that
you call on a higher
power in a very specific
form and feel your connection
and ask for help.
Dialogue whatever
feels right for you.
So you can close your eyes.
And ground yourself
so that you actually
feel the contact of your
sit bones against your seat.
Feel that you're taking
the support of the seat.
And inhale grounding through
the base of the body.
Exhale lifting
through the crown.
And imagine that you're sitting
in a very, very beautiful
mountain grove with
overhanging trees and very
beautiful flowers and bushes.
There's a green lawn in
front of you around you.
And you're feeling very relaxed.
The air is warm.
As you sit you become aware
that there is a radiant energy
that's moving towards
you over the mountains
coming closer and closer.
And when it becomes close
enough for you to distinguish
the features you see
that it is the form
of an exquisitely
beautiful woman
with golden skin
with long dark hair
and very bright large eyes.
And as you discern
her features you
feel that her energy is flowing
towards you as deep compassion
and love.
She seats herself in front of
you looking into your eyes.
And you allow yourself
to breathe her energy,
to take in her energy
with every inhalation
and to exhale it
through your body.
As you watch this
feminine figure
you become aware
that from her heart
is flowing a radiant blue light.
It's flowing from her
heart into your heart.
And as you take in the
rays of blue light coming
from her heart you feel that
light opening your heart,
opening your entire inner body.
And you realize that there
are depths of compassion,
depths of love, depths of
sweetness that are literally
being breathed into
you by a goddess.
She's breathing grace into you.
She's breathing love into you.
She's breathing power into you.
She's breathing safety into you.
She's breathing
awareness and insight.
And you draw it in.
And you breathe it
back out until you
realize that you're in a dance.
You're breathing in her light.
You're breathing it back to her.
And as you sit with this
sacred feminine presence
you hear from her, is there
anything you want and need
in this moment?
It's an invitation to speak
your desires or your fears.
And you take a moment to say
whatever it is that you're
moved to say or to ask for.
Perhaps some wisdom
or insight flows
in this moment from this being.
Or perhaps you just speak
or ask your question
and let yourself be.
And then there is
this moment when
you realize that
you are being asked
to breathe her into your
body, into your heart.
And you literally feel as though
this sacred feminine figure
dissolves into particles
of light, which
flow in with your breath and
become part of your own energy
field.
So as you move as you speak
you have been empowered
to move and speak with
the love with the grace,
with the presence of this energy
which has become a part of you.
And you can return to this
contemplation any time.
Refresh it.
Deepen it.
Ask questions.
And this practice is
really a wonderful way
to invoke the help of the
divine forces that are literally
present around us just
waiting to be asked.
They're not distant.
They're not far off.
We don't have to be good.
We don't have to be successful.
We just have to open
ourselves and ask
to know that there are countless
loving sacred presences that
really want to help us
navigate this world.
>> Thank you, Sally.
That was so beautiful.
And we can do that with any--
>> Any--
>> Archetype.
>> Any archetype.
>> Anyone, any energy that we
wish to call into ourselves
or awaken within ourselves--
>> Or awaken within ourselves.
>> Because it is
not outside of us.
>> Yes, well and doing this
practice will awaken our sense
of those energies.
Often when I teach
this in a group people
will share that what
comes to them is not
an official deity
but a light or a--
you know, someone who's
been very meaningful to them
who's no longer in the world.
So in a certain sense what we
are doing in this practice is
calling on--
let's call them guardians--
the-- if some people
would call them ancestors.
They take many forms.
And the thing is to
know that this world--
the subtle world is present
for us and wants to help.
And once you start to get that
then your whole relationship
to the world starts to change.
>> Lovely.
Well thank you for being here.
It's always amazing
to be with you.
>> You are so welcome.
I'm so delighted to talk
to you and to really feel
the wisdom with which you
offer these sessions for so
many people.
>> Oh, thank you so much.
And thank you for joining us.
And enjoy taking that beautiful
practice into your daily life.
I'll see you next time.
[MUSIC PLAYING]